Docs for Developers (#1527)
matrix-org/matrix.org: content/docs/developers/_index.md

+++
title = "Developers"
weight = 300
[extra]
emoji = "⚒️"
tile = "I want to develop a client, bridge or bot"
last_updated = "2022-10-18T16:00:00Z"
+++

## Elements of Matrix

### Homeserver

A homeserver is a piece of software hosting accounts of Matrix users. It is
bound to a single domain that cannot change over time. The accounts on a server
have an identifier made of a local part, and a server part. A typical identifier
would be

```txt
@username:example.com
```

> Users on a server can send `events` into `rooms`. An event is a particular json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users on a server can send *events* into *rooms*. An event is a particular json
```

object, describing what a user is trying to do (join a room, send a message,
update a specific value…). In the case of instant messaging, rooms are very
similar to Slack, Discord or IRC channels. Most of the events in such rooms are

> about sending messages. Rooms have a unique technical identifier, and zero or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
messages. Rooms have a unique technical identifier, and zero or
```

Author: Hm unsure about this one. Are the events themselves sending messages? Technically, the events _are_ the messages, aren't they?

Reviewer: > Technically, the events *are* the messages, aren't they?

Yes, that is what this say if you remove those two words as suggested, no?

Author: Ok I really need another coffee, for some reason I didn't see the "sending" was removed too.

> several human-readable aliases or addresses. Aliases are made of a room name,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more human-readable aliases. Aliases are made of a room name,
```

and a server part. A typical room alias would be:

```
#mountain-bike:example.com
```

Homeservers are federated: the Matrix specification defines a [Sever-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/server-server-api/)
(also known as Federation API) to describe interactions between servers.
Whenever a user is in a room, their homeserver needs to have a local copy of
that room.

For example, if `@alice:outdoors.com` is the first user from `outdoors.com` to
try to join `#mountain-bike:example.com`, then her homeserver is going to reach
out to `example.com` to get a copy of the room. `outdoors.com` and `example.com`
then stay in touch to synchronise their copy of the room.

Whenever the homeserver receives new events, it's in charge of parsing them,
perform checks on the event, and take action accordingly (e.g. add a specific 

> user to a specific room when it receives a room join event). The expected

Reviewer: Maybe it's just me, but what does "add a specific user to a specific room" mean if not sending a join event? Maybe we could just write something like "e.g. sending messages from users on the homeserver to other participating homeservers, or distributing messages from other participating homeservers to users"?

behaviour of homeservers is described fully in the [Matrix Specification](https://spec.matrix.org).

You can find a list of existing homeserver implementations in the

> [Ecosystem > Servers](/ecosystem/servers) section of this website. Some of them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Ecosystem > Servers](/ecosystem/servers) section of this website. Most of them
```

are open source, so you can explore how they work. Please also refer to their
documentation if you want to deploy them either for testing or in production.

### Client

Homeservers communicate between each other with the Server-Server / Federation
API, but they also communicate with clients in a standard way: the Client-Server
API.

> Clients are pieces of software who can use a Matrix account to send and receive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients are pieces of software that can use a Matrix account to send and receive
```

Reviewer: (I'm not sure the previous is gramatically wrong, but this sounds better to me)

events from a specific homeserver. The clients themselves only ever talk to the
homeserver of the account they're using. If a client uses the
`@alice:example.com` account, they will only talk to `example.com`.

The most common kinds of client are the user facing ones. In the case of instant
messaging, those clients show rooms as timeline of messages, with users joining,
leaving, redacting messages…

To get a better idea of what clients look like in practice, you can find a list
on [Ecosystem > Clients](/ecosystem/clients) and give them a go.

If you're more interested in writing your own client to bring a new experience
to users, you may want to rely on an existing SDK (see
[Ecosystem > SDKs](/ecosystem/sdks)). Those will do significant part of the
Matrix heavy-lifting and allow you to focus on the UX you want to build.
Finally, if you're interested in learning more about the interactions between
clients and servers, please head to
[the Client-Server section of the Matrix Specification](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/client-server-api/).

> ### AppService (bots and bridges)

Reviewer: It's not actually that common for bots to be appservices, so this heading seems a bit misleading.

Reviewer 2: I would kinda disagree. While in the public that is true there are some non public projects using appservices to be able to do bots at scale. One public project may be mjolnir which seems to be looking into using appservices to provide itself to multiple users.

So I think it makes sense to list both there. However it might make sense to say that appservices for bots only make sense of you have to deal with a scale where using /sync or a single bot user may not work anymore.
As in: appservices for bots are mostly a thing you need for scaling and should not be the default for bots.

Reviewer: I'm just saying that bots are not a kind of appservice, which the title reads like to me. I'm totally in favor of having client-like and appservice-like bots both documented.

Author: I think it's worth keeping `(bots and bridges)` in the title because `appservice` is a very matrixy term. Newcomers will not necessarily know what appservices are. The first paragraph also says:

> Many Matrix bots are non-human clients. They can be built with the same SDKs as regular clients, and instead of showing a UI to display what is happening they will listen to events, parse them, and for example send automatic replies.

I'm wondering what's the best way to make it more obvious that regular clients can be bots too. Should I add (clients and bots) in the `### Clients` title?

Reviewer: How about `Appservices (bridges and some bots)`?

Author: I went with "some" bots :)

Many Matrix bots are non-human clients. They can be built with the same SDKs as
regular clients, and instead of showing a UI to display what is happening they
will listen to events, parse them, and for example send automatic replies.

#### Simple and advanced bots

A good example of simple bot would be a RSS bot: it subscribes to a RSS feed
completely outside of Matrix and whenever it sees a new item in the feed it
posts a message in a specific Matrix room, with the name of the item. Such a bot
is nothing more than a very limited and specialised client.

But sometimes you need to get a more global view of what is happening on your
homeserver to take action. If you want to write an anti-spam module for example,
you want to be able to read each and every message from public rooms to detect
patterns and ring the alarm or take action directly.

To do it with a bot, you would need to invite the bot in each and every room
where you want the monitoring to happen. An appservice is able to monitor all
the _unencrypted_ events (messages sent/edited/redacted, people joining or 

> leaving rooms).

Reviewer: It is? 😄

Don't you need either the main user or a user from the appservice's user namespace in the room?

Author: From the bridge crew:

>  For your appservice to monitor what's happening in a room, its HS needs to have a local copy of the room, so a local user needs to be said room, you don't need to have a user from within the namespace in the room

> if my appservice has the namespace foo-*, it will be able to monitor all the unencrypted events within all the rooms starting with #foo- that my HS has a local copy of, even if there is no @foo-*:mydomain.tld user in them

But you're right I need to say an appservice is bound to their namespace 👍

A homeserver is a piece of software hosting accounts of Matrix users. It is
bound to a single domain that cannot change over time. The accounts on a server

> have an identifier made of a local part (the user id), and a server part, which

Author: Eh coffee is not strong enough this morning…
